JUDY WOODRUFF: But first:
an experiment in rethinking
public housing that encourages
healthier living by
changing the larger
environment for residents.
Jeffrey Brown
reports from Denver.
JEFFREY BROWN: At age 71, Noel
Taylor says she's become more
active and health-conscious
than ever before.
NOEL TAYLOR, Denver: Every
year, I improve my diet,
I improve my exercise.
JEFFREY BROWN: Her
change in behavior didn't
happen by accident.
Four years ago, here in
downtown Denver, Taylor
joined an experiment in
making healthy living
part of the design
and daily life of a
public housing project.
Among the amenities here,
access to a garden plot.
NOEL TAYLOR: I noticed,
all summer long, I
was getting healthier.
The more of my own
vegetables I was eating,
the more energy I had.
It's made a huge difference.
JEFFREY BROWN: So, this sounds
all too good to be true.
NOEL TAYLOR: I know.
(LAUGHTER)
JEFFREY BROWN: And there's more.
The Denver Botanic Gardens
hosts a farmers market giving
away free produce to residents.
WOMAN: We're going to talk about
how to shop healthy on a budget.
JEFFREY BROWN: Another group
offers classes on healthy
recipes and shopping.
MAN: Now we will take
your blood pressure.
JEFFREY BROWN: In a
clinic on the ground
floor of one building,
public health physicians
schedule regular visits
to do routine checkups.
There's a light rail stop, both
for easy transportation and to
get residents out of their cars.
MAN: Do the other side now.
JEFFREY BROWN: Plus,
bike rentals and a nearby
shop to teach kids how
to maintain their bikes.
Even the architecture and public
art was designed to encourage
residents to get outside and
take a walk.
ISMAEL GUERRERO, Director,
Denver Housing Authority: We
really wanted this to look like
a neighborhood,
not a development.
JEFFREY BROWN: Ismael Guerrero,
director of the Denver Housing
Authority, says that, 10
years ago, this was a high-crime
neighborhood, with 250 units
of rundown public housing.
Something had to be done.
ISMAEL GUERRERO: What we
learned in early conversations
with residents in particular
was, they didn't just want
a new unit to move into.
They wanted a better
quality of life.
So we really started expanding
our perspective on what we
were trying to accomplish here.
JEFFREY BROWN: The result
completed earlier this summer
is the Mariposa development, a
mixture of 800 apartments and
town homes, one-third public
housing, a third subsidized,
and a third rented
at market value.
The overall cost was
$150 million; $60 million
came from federal, state
and local government
programs, with the rest coming
through private investment.
Already, Mariposa is
becoming a model for
rethinking public housing.
ISMAEL GUERRERO: Part of it is
physical health, and part of
it is what we call neighborhood
health.
Right?
How healthy is the place?
Is it safe?
Are there healthy
activities for you to do?
Is there healthy food
in the neighborhood
for you to go and eat?
Is there a healthy economy
where people can get jobs
and start a business?
JEFFREY BROWN: The Osage
Cafe, located in one of the
apartment buildings, is designed
to meet some of those needs.
In addition to the food, it
provides culinary training and
internships for young people
in the neighborhood, like
20-year-old Israel Trejo.
ISRAEL TREJO, Denver: And I
think that's where I discovered
I had a passion for cooking.
JEFFREY BROWN: What
did it give you?
ISRAEL TREJO: It gave me
the entire world, basically.
Like, with the skills
that I have learned now,
I could go anywhere.
I could go be anything.
JEFFREY BROWN: Trejo now has
a job at one of Denver's top
restaurants, and plans to
operate his own food truck soon.
ANGELA RODRIGUEZ, Denver:
Are you looking forward to
helping me grow some fruits and
vegetables?
JEFFREY BROWN: Angela Rodriguez,
a single mother of two teens,
dreams of one day buying
her own home.
She has a full-time job at a
nearby community college, but
Denver's booming housing market
makes ownership difficult.
She lives in a subsidized town
home at Mariposa, which she
says is very different from the
old-style projects
she grew up in nearby.
ANGELA RODRIGUEZ: As a new
style of public housing, it did
take me a little bit of time
for the adjustment.
When new tenants are
mingling with other tenants
that come from different
walks of life, it's
helping us to develop into new
perspectives of modern living.
JEFFREY BROWN: Rodriguez
uses public transportation,
has taken up gardening,
and has fully embraced
the culture of health
that is promoted here.
But is Mariposa working?
It's too early for
definitive answers.
According to a 2015 study by the
Denver Public Health Department,
about half the residents
had participated in
health-related activities
over the previous three years.
But the study also showed the
amount of exercise residents
pursued had changed little.
Just over a third said they
exercised five times a week.
About the same amount said they
exercised one to four times
a week, and 26 percent said
they rarely or never exercised.
Smoking rates decreased, but
only slightly, from 30 percent
of residents down to 24 percent.
And these so-called active
staircases, designed
with a bit of whimsy...
ISMAEL GUERRERO: It's a way
to engage kids, and actually
now the adults enjoy it.
JEFFREY BROWN: ... to
lure residents away
from using the elevator.
Well, so far, they're
not having a big impact.
THERESA MICKIEWICZ, Denver
Public Health: We actually did
observational counts, where
we sat there and we counted
people who used the stairs vs.
people who used the elevator,
and we compared it
against a control
staircase in the Mariposa
redevelopment, and we found
absolutely no difference.
JEFFREY BROWN: Theresa
Mickiewicz, an epidemiologist
with Denver Public
Health, is overseeing a
study of the development.
And while major improvements in
health remain to be seen, she
believes something important
is happening here, and
she expects the numbers
to reflect that soon.
THERESA MICKIEWICZ: While
maintaining my objectivity
as an evaluator, do
I think that there is
value in this type of project?
I would say yes.
Individually, these components
have been shown in the evidence,
in literature, to improve
health outcomes.
JEFFREY BROWN: The city
of Denver is so confident
in this new model,
it's about to embark on
a similar development
that will be three times
larger than Mariposa.
That construction is expected
to begin later next year.
For the "PBS NewsHour,"
I'm Jeffrey Brown,
reporting from Denver.